So when working with polymorphism,
sometimes objects need to be
what's called type casting.
And type casting is the implicit or
explicit act of
converting an object type
into a different type.
So casting can be performed upward or
downward on an inheritance tree.
For example, let's say we have dog and
cat classes that both inherit
from the animal class here,
when we create an object with
the type of the superclass,
but we instantiate it with
the type of the subclass,
this is an implicit up cast, right?
I've casted it upward
from a dog to animal.
In an implicit up cast,
the object now only has access
to the methods of the class
that it was up casted to.
For example, even though the object
sasha is an instance of the dog class,
its type is animal, so
this object cannot reference
members that are specific to
the dog class, such as fetch.
So here,
if we say sasha There is no fetch there.
So in order to access methods from the
subclass if you just want it to do this,
then we need to explicitly downcast
that object to a dog, the type dog.
So we are going to downcast sasha,
sasha the cat [LAUGH] to
enable her to scratch
her itch cuz right now
sasha the cat cannot
access the scratch
method in the cat class.
All right, so sasha the cat,
she was able to make a sound, and
this is really interesting because
when we called make sound,
it executed the make sound
method from the subclass, right?
The one that was
the overriding implementation.
But other than that,
it's not able to access any other
methods that are in that class.
So it gets a little wonky in the brain.
But let's say that we
want sasha to scratch.
We'll say sasha., and
it's not explicitly here for
her to scratch, but
you say I know it exists, I say scratch.
If you do this,
notice you have an error here.
And it's saying we don't know
what you're talking about.
So in order to explicitly downcast
sasha from animal to dog just so
we can make this call,
what we'll do is right before
the object,
we're going to put in parentheses,
the class that we want to downcast to.
So that would be cat.
So this alone,
it's quickly changing sasha to a cat,
but in order to make that
whole thing an object,
because we haven't stored that anywhere,
we will put one more set of
parentheses around the whole thing,
making it an object, and
then it can X's cat.
Now, this is not changing
the overall object sasha.
Sasha is still defined
the as an animal here.
It's just a temporary casting to access
something and then being able to do so.
All right, so let's run and
make sure sasha can scratch our itch.
Yes.
>> So with this typecasting does
it only have to do with objects or
is it also a term that's
applicable to fields?
For example, let's say you're doing,
I don't know,
integer.2string to treat
a number as a string,
would that be considered typecasting as
well, or is that just something different?
>> So that would be something
different because you only can
casts upward or
downward within your own hierarchy.
So integer and
string have no hierarchy together.
So when you say two string is basically
creating a brand new object and
giving you that as a string.
It's not doing a cast.
If you try it and that's my tip to you,
be very careful with typecasting,
because if I try to cast
this to anything else,
let's say a rectangle for
example, the compiler
wouldn't necessarily complain
about me doing that.
But once we get into execution mode and
they actually try to do it,
it's gonna fall apart.
It's gonna throw an exception
because I'm not able to
cast into something that's
not in my family tree.
>> So it doesn't know what you're talking
about, or therefore it's probably passing
a whole bunch of null values and
therefore it doesn't work.
>> Well, it knows what I'm talking about,
it knows that rectangle class,
it just can't make these two
be related when they're not.
Yeah, okay.
So again, that was a temporary casting
just so that I can access that object.
Matter of fact, if I did this,
I say, sasha.scratch,
and then I say sasha.scratch like this,
again,
doesn't know what I'm talking about,
right?
So I did not change sasha's type at all.
I only cast it for this one statement
in order to do what I needed to do.
If I wanted to make sasha
permanently be something else,
I want to cast it and then store
it in an object, I can do that so
that later I can access any of
the methods from that subclass.
And so in order to do that, notice I've
cast sasha to a dog on this second line,
and then I've stored that into a new
dog variable called sasha TheDog.
And then if I wanted to access anything
from the dog class, I could do so
using sasha the dog.
>> What if you didn't create sasha but
it was given to you and
you want to try and cast it?
>> You can do that.
So let's say you-.
>> What happens if you
don't know what it is?
>> You always know what it is because
if someone gave it to you that means
you specify that in your parameter list,
so you say the type or whatever.
>> But if they specify it as animal,
they give you an animal, and
you think it might be a cat,
then you want it to say-.
>> Yeah, beautiful.
Okay, I got some material on that.
We'll get to that in a couple of minutes,
all right?
All right.
Yeah, so we talked about casting her.
We talked about be careful, right?
With the casting.
Yeah, so be careful.
This was a cat, right?
So this is sasha as a cat and
now I'm trying to cast sasha to a dog.
Remember what I told you
about the hierarchy tree?
You would think, animal, cat, dog,
this is all in the same domain,
we got the same mama.
Look, they are not siblings, okay?
They have no relationships.
If sasha was a cat,
I try to make sasha a dog.
Again, there will not be a compilation
error but when I run this,
I will get an error an exception
that says class cast exception.
So if you ever see that exception,
that's what that means.
It's gonna say I cannot make that cat,
I can't cast it to a dog.
>> What do you do if you were
to formalize instead of saying,
a cat or the dog say, the cat is an animal
like sasha the cat is sasha the animal or
sasha the animals are sasha the dog.
>> Yeah, that's what we did in our code.
So you could do that because
they have a relationship,
but you can't change it from
a cat to a dog like that.
>> So, basically after like to navigate
those relationships, step-by-step,
if that's what you're
trying to accomplish.
>> Yeah.
And you should only use casting
if absolutely necessary.
It's kinda dangerous [LAUGH] territory
if you submit a pull request with
some casting in it, anybody who's
reviewing it it's a red flag,
you look at it very carefully and try to
think of other ways [LAUGH] to do this.
So yeah, be very careful if you use this.